---
layout: index
title: 'Children of the First Pandemic'
subtitle: '<em>A Plague Tale: Innocence</em> as Folktale'
post_main_image: children-of-the-first-pandemic.jpg
main_image_alt: screenshot of A Plague Tale Innocence featuring Amicia and Hugo in a dark church crypt looking a three statues with the sunlight coming in behind the statues
date: 2020-06-24 02:09:40
tags: [fantasy, low-fantasy, historical, pc-game]
---

Children of the First Pandemic

 


The year 2019 saw the outbreak of disease leading to widespread social unrest in Europe.

I'm referring to A Plague Tale: Innocence, last year's historical adventure game that won top honors for narrative achievement even as its praiseworthy young characters won the hearts of an adoring fanbase on Xbox One, Playstation 4, and personal computer.

Launched one year before Coronavirus reset many of our expectations, A Plague Tale has been inspirational beyond its modest goals and its linear story due to its expectation shattering aesthetic: its appealing use of the values associated with childhood without being conventionally "family friendly."

You should know three things about A Plague Tale. It’s a straight shot through a simple story inside of an action-adventure game. It’s both a fun videogame and a sophisticated experience designed for both artistic impact and nerd cred. Most importantly, it’s a serious, joyful game for both children and adults that bridges the gap between the two. To achieve this, A Plague Tale starts out with a family scene from an idyllic and detailed vision of the European Middle Ages.
The year is 1348, one year following the historical outbreak of the Black Death in Europe, in the kingdom of Aquitaine in southwestern France. Fifteen year-old noblewoman Amicia De Rune must protect her five year-old brother Hugo as they flee for their lives from the murderous Inquisition, who are imposing a martial quarantine upon the common folk, beneath the banner of a nonstandard double-bared cross. The De Rune siblings meet other displaced children along the way, who join the party at various points to utilize their youthful competence as they unravel the mysteries of the De Rune family and of the plague. Along the journey, the children encounter eerie parallels to our current daily experience: rumors of an encroaching illness spreading through the land, causing social unrest leading to an atmosphere of distrust while the political pot begins to boil over.

A Plague Tale wins its players’ hearts not only due to the lovely camaraderie of its young cast, but also due to its strategic and puzzle-solving adventure-genre characteristics and the feeling of constant acceleration incited by the the  narrative design. To identify what makes A Plague Tale rewarding and unique, we’ll need to cover both its artistically portrayed character-based story as well as its implementation of its gameplay features. First, though, we should go over the unifying factor that holds this beautiful together – it’s setting, a historical interactive landscape full of beauty and depth but also terror and decay.

 


Leveraging the genere conventions of its setting – knights and castles, armor and ruins – A Plague Tale exudes the sense of the medieval ethos at every turn. It accomplishes this by depicting its historical detail from its characters' own medieval worldview, showing the fear and the social disturbances of the 14th-century pandemic in a way that feels authentically medieval.



The fantastic and the historical are united in this vivid setting through an abiding sense of authenticity. This authenticity is perhaps borne of the close relationship between the developers and the land, for the game development company Asobo Studio is based out of the city of Bordeaux in the very locale where their game is set. Narrative designer Sébastien Renard commented on Reddit regarding the creative inspiration for the setting, "As we're French, living in a city with a rich and heavy past, we walk all day long in the shadow of medieval monuments, so it helps imagine the way villages and cities were built, what the countryside looked like, etc."

Several types of objects, unnecessary for completing the chapters, are found often in out-of-the-way places. When discovered, these items are added to the Inventory menu, where informational dialogs are displayed along with the 3d artwork for each object, explaining its historical significance. These come in three different categories -- "Curiosities" for everyday objects that illustrate medieval life, "Gifts" for knick-knacks that the children find during the course of the game, and "Hugo's Herbarium" for flowers, which when discovered prompt Hugo to pick the flower from the ground and place it in his sister's hair.

 


That detailed historical intrigue interlaced in the story’s setting and the game’s environment is best described by examples. In a meticulously and hauntingly rendered interior of a large, austere church, a simple fourteenth-century rosary can be found. When discovered, Amicia tells Hugo what it is. Hugo picks up a wooden shield from a fallen English shoulder near the scene of a recent battle of the contemporaneous Hundred Years’ War, and the children soon encounter one of the foreign invaders in a powerful expression of empathy. A genealogy listing Amicia and Hugo’s lineage gathers dust in a castle surrounded by statuary and tapestries depicting mysterious alchemical symbolism.


These details and many others like them objectify a more objective way of thinking, showing the way medieval people reacted to their place in their world. The scenery in the game includes ruins and statuary expressing the aura of layered civilization, of an already old period of history looking building on the bones of generations still more ancient and mysterious. Though benefiting from an uncommonly sophisticated education for their time, the medieval characters of A Plague Tale might not know the complete history of Roman activity in Europe, but a simple journey takes them to centuries’ old fortifications containing devices, structures, symbols, and information that they can use to escape danger. This creates a world full of material significance, an objective world close to its sources of meaning. In the game, the reverential attitude of the Middle Ages arises naturally out of this direct relationship to the forces at play in the world.

The central presence of religion in the society depicted in A Plague Tale is frequently and subtly referenced. Multiple church structures are featured prominently at various points in the game, often at critical plot junctures. The church interiors, with basic stone statuary and side altars as well as simply painted interior domes, reflect a time when Christianity was more unified and objective. The churches could be Orthodox and in their stone austerity almost look Reformed, despite being solidly Western and Catholic in their historical context.

 

Religion in the story appears starkly contrasted between the imperial, self-righteous zeal of the Inquisition and the innocent faith of Hugo and Amicia's prayers. As much as religion is depicted as a force of evil through the zealotry of the Inquisition soldiers, the artifacts of religion in society are continually portrayed as a positive, a psychological defense for the poor children against their trauma. Churches throughout the game are portrayed as places of safety, refuges for the children's threatened innocence.

Both views of religion exemplify the historical experience of the institutional Church. Furthermore, and authentically portraying a historical time and region where many gnostic and non-mainstream sects existed, the story explicitly draws a distinction between mainstream catholic Christianity and the religion of the Inquisition. At one point, a cutscene shows a bishop from the Church reporting on the Church's investigation of this Inquisition. The bishop says that the Inquisition was operated without the approval of the Pope and stated that he found only “heresy and occultism.” No further argument or example needs to be given than this to convince theology nerds and Church history buffs that they should love A Plague Tale.

But A Plague Tale is not a religious game, in the same way, for example, that the 2008 indie title That Dragon Cancer about a Christian family's struggle is. Instead, A Plague Tale reverberates with the religious realism of the historical worldview, expressing the longing for living myth at the core of the fantasy genre by extroverting it in the framework of real-world history.

Asobo seems to shy away from the fantasy genre label, preferring to promote the game as historical drama. This is reasonable, as nothing in the world as presented would be far outside the expectations of reality from the characters' medieval worldview. However, the story's grand-scale mysticism functions as a kind of fantasy, the low kind, where the mythological has retreated into the artefacts of history. Alchemy unites the legend with the gameplay itself and with the greater plot. The gnostic references and alchemical paraphernalia offer up the leftover remains of the great spiritual forces of epic myth after they have passed into our historical experience.
 


The historical context serves as a referee in the game's story construction, mediating between the immediate drama and the mythological background from the framing plot. The practical relevance of the historical context to the game is that it builds the aesthetic incentive for continuing to interact with the narrative. While the realistic graphics, exhibiting a lovely pastel color design, are greatly involved in the aesthetic motivation, the desire to play in order to experience the narrative is also central to the game’s aesthetic design.

Both of the two components of the narrative – the background mythology and the interpersonal survival story of Amicia, Hugo, and their young friends – fit in to and define the emotional aesthetic. Although central to the experience, the narrative does not flaunt itself. Simple and direct, it pulls the player along through its seventeen chapters without drawing much attention to plot elements.

The linear narrative design exhibited in A Plague Tale confines the experience to a single plot thread from beginning to end, without multiple plot choices or divergent endings. There is also little choice in the development of the characters and no choice at all affecting their relationships or conversations. Interest is maintained mainly by scripted dialog between characters being triggered around the players’ exploration and actions. Supporting this narrative design, the map design directs the player’s movements through the chapter without allowing open world exploration while still holding up to scrutiny at their boundaries. 

Although keenly relatable on an emotional level in the narrative, the characters never feel very much like avatars for the player. In fact, there is not even one specific player character for players to identify with. Through most of the game, the third-person over-the-shoulder viewpoint follows Amicia and Hugo together, and at various times the party includes other characters who can perform tasks at the player's initiation. Instead of being blank canvases for players to fill with their own self-actualization, these characters are part of the brush by which the game and the player cooperate to paint within the lines.

Within those pre-drawn lines, A Plague Tale grants players situational freedom to experience interactively its romanticized medieval aesthetic and its moral depth. This is most evident in situations where the player has to decide whether or not to save people from being killed or whether or not to allow guilty enemies to be killed in the process of solving a problem. Choosing to save lives requires more thought and skill and rewards the player with the immediate narrative recognition of the accomplishment in the brief and deeply moving scripted moments of character interaction. These scripted events recognize the moral significance as well as the emotional impact inherent in the player’s choice. The game excels at accommodating multiple strategies and for rewarding ingenuity and small-scale exploration, and the most significant of those rewards are the secret, spontaneous beats -- scripted dialog and reactions, as well as alternative solutions and optional places to explore in the various chapters.


Player agency in A Plague Tale arises holistically out of its gamplay mechanics. The primary gameplay genre is definitively [stealth](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Stealth_game), firmly in the tradition of live action games where success is dependent on one's ability to sneak past enemies or otherwise avoid direct conflict. In A Plague Tale, standing and fighting is not an option, but players are still afforded the choice of how to get by the numerous opponents, with options often including higher violence solutions involving Amicia's ranged attack with her sling and lower-violence solutions based on distracting enemies. Associated with the strategic side of the stealth problem solving is the secondary genre – the adventure game genre. This genre becomes evident when the player must search the environment for creative solutions to solve problems and move onward.

The adventure mechanics are most directly relevant in the spatial-mechanical puzzles, where the children characters must work together at the player’s prompting to operate machinery in order to get past obstacles. Solving these puzzles involves a break from the ordinary live-action gameplay. This break with the typical control scheme is one of the few aspects that takes players out of the immediate immersive simulation of being in the game.

Notwithstanding the mechanical puzzles, A Plague Tale delivers an experience based on the concept of immersion. Distractions from experiencing the game world from its own internal perspective are kept to a minimum. The combined effect of the mechanics and the interactive narrative is to forge a realistic simulation that is fully convincing in its own context. Since the game’s initial announcement during the 2017 E3 convention, Asobo has always marketed the game for players desiring to be immersed in the historical medieval realism. To that end, the Settings menu in the game’s interface menu contains an HUD Preset option than can be toggled between a Standard mode and an Immersive mode. The Immersive mode removes all overlay elements from the screen, except for the small targeting crosshair when firing with the sling, leaving no visual distractions from the richly rendered medieval world. The HUD Preset option is also a difficulty setting, as turning off the overlay requires players to listen more carefully to audible clues and to pay more attention to the environment in order to evade detection by enemies. Since focusing on the environment is part of the ideal gameplay design and the overlay adds little value, players are strongly advised to use the Immersive mode.

The immersive visual experience is complemented by the lute-like melodies of the score composed by Olivier Deriviere, along with the voice acting. There are three separate voice tracks selectable from the menu, in three different languages -- English, French, and German. Given the historical context, playing in either English or German feels like an odd betrayal. Fortunately, the voice track language can be adjusted independently of the written language in the game interface. Hearing the French language in the medieval environment is a particularly captivating experience.

That being said, the superb English voice acting is necessary for English-language players to experience the plot. Charlottle McBurney, voice of Amicia in the English track, received for her work the 2019 NVGTR award for best performance in a Drama. The vaguely proto-Latino accent that McBurney used for Amicia has served to characterize her just as fundamentally as the character art.

A Plague Tale's focus on immersion does not preclude its challenging gamer appeal. And the game can be hard. It features traditional hardcore gaming elements, even those as simplistic as old-school arcade boss-fights. A Plague Tale received a NVGTR award for its control design, but the additional mechanics outside of the main action-stealth and adventure gameplay provide satisfaction and completeness to the experience of interacting with A Plague Tale as a videogame.

Chief among these mechanics is the progressively introduced munitions feature, whereby new types of ammunition for Amicia’s sling are introduced at various points. These open up new strategies for problem solving and maintains interest by requiring the player to continually learn the modified dynamics as the narrative unfolds. This is related to a crafting system whereby Amicia finds resources that she uses to craft the special types of ammunition. Those resources can also be used to craft upgraded equipment, such as a better sling and a larger ammunitions pouch, which make gameplay substantially easier and affect the available strategies later in the game. The equipment customizations can generally only be performed at specific workbench facilities which occur only sporadically throughout the chapters, requiring careful consideration and planning for players who want to maximize the upgrades. This adds strategic resource management to the game’s challenges. It also adds a modicum of character building.

Despite the narrative nature of the experience, gaming mechanics in their simplest forms are still a core part of what A Plague Tale embodies and delivers. While the game evokes comparisons on the one hand with artistic narrative-driven indie titles, it also feels like a console action-adventure game such as, for instance, the 2013 Tomb Raider, with which it shares several conceptual characteristics -- adventure-style narrative and spatial puzzles, live action mechanics, equipment upgrades, and female action heroine protagonists. Though Laura Croft may have more toys at her disposal, Amicia De Rune and A Plague Tale possess a level of self-sufficient confidence that the hipsters can only play at.

 

The gamer community on the Steam platform elected A Plague Tale as 2019’s Outstanding Story-Rich Game, while the community of videogame journalists awarded it four awards and nominated it for 18 in the NVGTR awards, making it the game with the highest number of nominations. The game’s lack of superfluous violence in its implementation of its feature set must have been a creative risk; and it evidently paid off, as Asobo announced on July 1 that the game had sold a million copies. 

The French people have adored their own, the game having won six awards in the French competition for gaming awards, the Pégases. Something in the game speaks to a craving for an authentic culture beyond the limits of the specific culture portrayed in the story; perhaps that is why other international communities have celebrated the game without even having voice translations in their languages. Russian content about A Plague Tale is plentiful on YouTube, and a prominent website from Spain features the game alongside native Spanish content (Besides the three featured languages for the voice acting, there are multiple language packs for captions and for the user interface, including Russian, Spanish, and Hebrew.)

The international fandom community has been marked by clean content. People sharing their favorite screenshots is a primary activity on the reddit groups, along with original fan art, video let's plays, and even fan music tracks remixing composer Oliver Deriviere's score. The fans have been anticipating the announced sequel, its content and setting a matter of great speculation.

The fans' memes have particularly reveled in the coincidence of A Plague Tale depicting the results of a horrible uncontrolled infectious disease. The irony of the coronavirus hitting at the same time as the hype from the Steam Awards and the NVGTR Awards has very likely sustained interest in the game, something that Asobo's official social media accounts have vaguely alluded to over the intervening months. Whatever Asobo may be planning for the sequel, it seems impossible that the relevance of the pandemic to the main idea driving the mythic backstory could be ignored. At the very least, A Plague Tale shows us imagery of vast, external infection being mirrored by the inner psychological struggle of innocent protagonists' trying to preserve their heritage in a time when the whole world is turning upside down.

It is these driving dichotomies that cause A Plague Tale to be so emotionally powerful. Even beyond its narrative and thematic dichotomies, the game itself embodies several dichotomies that allow it to be so compelling by bringing forth the best out of different kinds of experiences.

Perhaps the most external of the dichotomies is that A Plague Tale falls into a gray area between the conventional classifications of a mainstream of “AAA” videogame and an indie game. Journalists seem to classify it as an indie work, and the validity of that designation is granted by the experimental immersiveness, high artistry, and lack of reliance on traditional combat, while its difficult gameplay and its traditional milieu reflect the expectations of the mainstream gaming community. It manages to be both a game that focusing on delivering an artistic experience and a game that is conventionally fun to play. This focus allows A Plague Tale to confront players with its more conceptual dichotomy.

Here is a traditional story, emphasizing family values in a milieu that celebrates Western history and culture unashamedly; however, its narrative in many ways challenges and subverts the traditional heroic pattern. There is no feeling of deliberate intentionality behind the game's being set in the Christian West, but there is also no meta commentary, criticism, or contextualization of the Christian West. In a time characterized by internal awareness and self-criticism of the traditions forming historical perspectives, and especially critical awareness of the role of Western perspectives, A Plague Tale avoids the plague of being all about itself. It avoids both self-criticism and self-absorbed glorying. 

For that matter, the game does indeed subvert traditional expectations as well as avant-garde ones. The simple, intimate story is not a heroic epic; in the context of the mythological backstory, the fact of its simple character-based narrative seems like a defiance and a subversion of self-aggrandizing epic Western fantasy. More importantly, the gameplay does not glorify action heroism in the same way that traditional hardcore gaming traditionally provides entertainment value. Where it does feature fast-twitch violence, the aesthetic of Amicia and company smashing the Inquisition really does produce a pro-feminist vibe. But all of this lies parallel to the most important subversion: Here is a game that honors family but that is not "family friendly."

In many respects, A Plague Tale feels like it may have been designed to appeal to children. The realistic, endearing portrayal of the small interactions of the child and teen characters and the narrative's depiction of the young struggling against the corrupt adult world make the game relatable for players who are children, to be sure. An even more childlike quality is the game's titular sense of innocence, a pervasive theme and feeling of wholesomeness and sincerity that encapsulates the whole experience. Children who play this game are confronted with an experience much like the fairy tales of old, before they were sanitized into Disney movies -- stories showing, as G.K. Chesterton famously said, that dragons can be defeated.

But if A Plague Tale may be a good game for children, it is an even better game for adults. Asobo's marketing and promotion of the game is oriented toward adults, with promotional artwork using darkness and light to suggest dirtiness and corruption, evoking a grimdark aesthetic that is not at all present in the narrative.

**[inline image: A Plague Tale poster/coverart]**

The narrative itself, though aligned with its childhood protagonists, is not without direct relevance to adults. The adult figures in this story are Amicia and Hugo's parents, Lord Robert and Lady Beatrice De Rune. Their adult perspective frames the opening sequences of the game, characterizing Amicia and Hugo with their parental concern, and their perspective is later validated as the justification for the children’s' struggle as well as their resourcefulness without which they could not succeed. For in A Plague Tale, the children are fighting to preserve and defend their parents instead of the other way around. This reversal of the typical parent-child relationship allows adult players to become innocent children again. The reciprocal relationship between childhood and adulthood -- the mutual reflection of childhood in adulthood and adulthood in childhood -- is a characteristic of storytelling that possesses the primal sincerity of sacred myth. The wise child possessing the maturity of old age and the playful adult possessing the sincere exuberance of youth are both saintly figures. The great success of A Plague Tale's intricate narrative artistry, affected and emerging out of the entire experience of the game as a whole, is that it uses its main theme of the sanctity of childhood innocence to honor adulthood.

The game is rated Mature for "Blood and Gore, strong language, and violence," but that designation seems irrelevant. (The strong language comes from the vocabulary of some of the enemy NPCs, but let's face the truth that today's children have already heard all the words.) As an adult game, this is the kind of adult game that children can play, as opposed to the immature games that some adults want to play. All content and sociopolitical considerations taken into account, the game is probably one of the least potentially offensive pieces of popular media of the decade, delivering a serious story in a respectful and timeless fashion. This experience of depth and maturity from within the perspective of childhood innocence sustains the experience from the opening tutorial sequence, through the action sequences, puzzles, and narrative content of the midgame, through to the sometimes incongruously difficult boss fights to the final closing act.

Because of the wide relevance of its historical setting and its universal themes, countless comparisons could be made with all kinds of cultural works. Here is one less well known but strongly relevant comparison: the anonymous medieval English poem entitled The Pearl. That poem was actually written in the very same century in which A Plague Tale is set. It is easy to imagine the young girl who is the subject of The Pearl, believed to be the daughter of the author and viewpoint narrator of the epic poem, as a contemporary of Amicia and Hugo from across the Channel. In lamentation of the death of his daughter, perhaps in the very same plague for which A Plague Tale was named, the author of The Pearl engaged in a lengthy lament on the concept of the death of the innocent. In one of the major sections of the epic, the specific refrain repeated at the end of each stanza reads in Middle English, "The innocent are safe by right." The poem expresses the agonized confusion over the fact that innocent children suffer and die, and the poet's conclusion resonates well with one of the strongest subjective narrative inferences from A Plague Tale, that though the innocent are vulnerable, though they are forced to suffer and to comprise, that even their camaraderie and friendship can be broken, they will be vindicated.

In the end, Amicia and her little brother face down the corruption lurking within their ancient heraldry and carry their heritage with them to the edge of the Sea, where many fellowships find their end in many such stories. There at the end, the children find the simplicity at the root of community, while adult players find the child-like desire to play reawakened within them.

The great strength of A Plague Tale is that it strikes the right balance of power and helplessness. This strikes an emotional chord resonating across the age range and especially with adult players. It is the chord of innocence, and it calls us to defy the deadness of age and to persevere through distress and hypocrisy.

Living once again through an era of plague, this game calls us to defy the psychological forces of apathy, inactivity, and decay and instead to rise up to live and to build, to fight to have something meaningful and worthwhile in our society once a status quo is obtained. Come what may for the twenty-first century or for Asobo's greatly anticipated sequel in the fourteenth, the gaming community is richer for the magnificent depiction of family honor in A Plague Tale: Innocence.